Project Proposal
Group Name: Project 1
Group Member: Bryce Haertle, Rain Hu, Kate Li, Kellan Meyer, Emily Zhang

For this project, our group has decided to use the New York city Taxi Trip Records Dataset found on kaggle. This data contains information about various types of taxi trips in New Tork city since 2009. The total size of this data is 61GB, which is suitable for the purpose of this assignment to use Statistics HPC for large size computation.

Over the years, New York city’s taxi industry has developed a lot. Starting from the signature yellow taxi to High-Volume For-Hire Services run by companies like Uber and Lyft. Therefore, we are curious about how such development in the taxi industry has changed the passenger’s tipping behavior. Our research question is how the correlation between trip distance and tip differs for the three types of taxi in New York City (Yellow Taxi, Green Taxi and High-Volume For-Hire Services(HVFHS)). The dataset is categorized into years and the type of taxi. We will be using three variables, Tip_amount, Total_amount and Trip_miles to answer our research question. These variables have different names in the three types of taxi dataset, but have very similar data collection methods and meaning. Therefore, we will unify the variables name. Tip_amount is the tip driver received from this trip with cash tip not included. Total_amount is the total amount of pay received by the driver, not including tips, tolls, taxes, net of commission and other surcharges. Trip_miles is the total miles for a passenger trip.

We will now explain our statistical method to answer this research question. First we need to create a new variable representing the ratio of tips and total amount of raw pay per trip. We need this variable because this ratio will help us understand whether this is a large tip or a small tip. We will calculate this ratio by dividing Tip_amount by Total_amount. Then we will compute the correlation between this ratio and Trip_miles for each type of taxi. We will then use statistical summaries including mean, standard deviations and variance to understand the general trend of this correlation for each type of taxi. Finally, to answer the question of whether there is a difference between these three types of taxi, we will run a t-test and get the p-value to help us to interpret the statistical significance of the differences we observe.

Finally, we will explain our computational steps. After loading our data (detailed code attached below), we will use tidyverse methods in R to do some basic data manipulation. Since the variables are named differently in the dataset for different types of taxis, we need to unify them into one big dataset for more convenient computation. We will first extract the data for yellow, green, and HVFHS separately and merge the trips across all past years together. Our goal is to have three separate files representing trips for three types of taxi. Then, we want to rename variables to a unified name, check variable types, clean data to handle missing values, errors, or inconsistencies, and calculate the tip ratio we need. Afterwards, we would use the cor() function to calculate correlation between tip ratio and trip distance. We can use summary() function or mean(), sd(), and var() as statistical variables to understand the general trend in the three dataset. We can then use these statistical variables to compute p-value with t.test() function in R. Our null hypothesis would be there is no significant difference on the topping behavior between the three types of taxi. Finally we will draw conclusions from the statistical and graphical analyses about how tip behaviors differ by taxi type and possibly over time.

This is a link to our dataset: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/microize/nyc-taxi-dataset
This is a link to our github repository: https://github.com/rain-hu364/NYtaxiProject.git
